Atomics let us regain functional
correctness, but this comes
at a cost of serialization
of memory accesses.
While they solve the data
race problem, they can't run
in parallel when all threads
target the same memory location.
Instead, each atomic gets
queued up one after the other.
We launch about 256 threads
and about 16,000 blocks.
In total, this gives us a queue
of 4 million atomic operations,
which obviously is too much.
But what are our options?
One common solution to this
contention is called privatization.
Instead of having all threads
update the same global histogram,
we allocate a small private
histogram for each thread block.
The threads within a block
can then safely use Atomics
on their private histogram.
Once they're done, the block
aggregates its counts and
updates the main histogram
with just one atomic operation.
In our simple two-block example,
each block increments its
own private histogram to a
total of two and then adds that
two to the global histogram once.
Although that might not help
much with just two blocks,
imagine having 16,000 of them.
In this scenario, we'd have
16,000 private histograms
updated in parallel.
Followed by just 16,000
atomic operations.
This is far fewer than the 4
million we'd otherwise have
if every thread incremented
the final histogram directly.
To implement this privatization,
we add a new parameter to
our kernel called block histograms.
Next we create a subspan for the
current thread blocks portion
of the privatized histogram.
The subspan function takes
an offset and a size.
We calculate the offset by
multiplying block index by
the histogram size.
So the first block has an offset
of zero and the second block
has an offset of 10 and so on.
This ensures each block writes
to its own slice of memory.
Then, just as before, each
thread computes the bin index.
However, we now increment the
privatized block histogram
instead of the global one.
After that, each block adds
its partial counts back into
the global histogram in parallel.
In the code snippet, the first
10 threads in the block each
handle one bin from the block's
private histogram.
They use an atomic reference
to safely add their local
counts to the final histogram.
Unfortunately, the highlighted
code has a bug in it.
Let's take a closer look.
In this code, we've assumed
that all threads finish updating
the block histogram before
the next section of code begins.
However, CUDA threads in a
block run concurrently
without guaranteed ordering.
This means that some threads
might have not even started
running yet, while others
have already exited the kernel.
One of the possible scenarios
is that some thread might
have read the block histogram
before it was updated.
To fix this issue, we have
to somehow make sure that
all threads finished updating the
block histogram before we read it.
CUDA provides a special function
called SyncThreads.
It acts as a barrier for all
threads in a block.
When a thread reaches this barrier,
it waits until every other thread
in the same block has arrived.
In that sense, it's similar
to STD barrier, but there's
one important difference.
Every thread in the block
must call sync threads from
the same logical path.
Which brings us to
the next exercise.
This time you'll have to use
thread block synchronization to
make sure all threads updated the
block histogram before reading it.